Notes comparing Keypad_I2C and Keypad_I2Ca arduino libraries.

May 24, 2014  -  G. D. (Joe) Young <jyoung@islandnet.com>


Keypad_I2Ca supports the PCA9554, PCA9554A, and PCA9555 I2C bus, I/O expansion
port chips. The Keypad_I2C library (no 'a') supports the PCF8574, PCF8574A,
PCF8575, and PCF8575C port chips.

By way of explanation for the confusing names, all these Keypad_xxxx libraries
grew from the original extension of the Keypad arduino library (authors Mark 
Stanley and Alexander Brevig) to use I2C bus I/O with just the PCF8574, 8-bit, 
simplest port chip. That library was called Keypad_I2C. Then, from curiosity
about other port expansion devices, from specific requests by some users, and
from a supplied modification by Paul Williamson, several other port chips were
fitted with libraries--all of them called Keypad_????. Most of these other
chips are sufficiently different from one another that there is not a
straightforward way to make one set of library functions adaptable to the
different devices--hence the many unique names/libraries. However, the PCF8574
(8-bit) and PCF8575 (16-bit) can use the same functions with the addition of
one number-of-bytes parameter to the keypad object's constructor. That addition
is now implemented in the latest Keypad_I2C. Similarly, the PCA9554 (8-bit) and
PCA9555 (16-bit) are enough alike (see NXP application note AN469) that they
can share a common set of library functions. Inspired by AN469, I originally
began assuming I could elaborate the Keypad_I2C library and have one set of
functions for all 4 types of device. But that assumption was overly optimistic
because the PCA955x chips with their higher drive capability, totem-pole
outputs require data direction configuration of the port bits. That brings in
several functions that the PCF857x devices do not need, so in the interest of
minimizing code size for the 'normal' case where only one type of device would
be used, I separated the libraries.

Because the PCA9554 has identical pinouts to the PCF8574, and the PCA9555 to
the PCF8575, the circuit connections are identical. Hence I include the wiring
diagram example for the PCF8574 in document I2CKeypadDatasheet.pdf unchanged as
a method of hooking up the keypad for the PCA9554. Similarly, the wiring for
the PCA9555 would be the same as for the PCF8575.

If one wanted to upgrade a system to use the higher drive capability of the
PCA955x port, the original system footprint can be retained and only the 
identifier Keypad_I2C needs to change to Keypad_I2Ca (in the constructor and in
the #include statement).

The constructor for Keypad_I2C has a final parameter which can be omitted if
using PCF8574s or set to PCF8575. Similarly, the constructor for Keypad_I2Ca
accepts PCA9555 in the final parameter position to select the 16-bit port.


